\input texinfo      @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename fountain-mode.info
@settitle Fountain Mode
@c @documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Fountain Mode: (fountain-mode).   Write screenplays.
@end direntry

@c macros
@macro program
@w{Fountain Mode}
@end macro
@macro version
3.7
@end macro
@macro repository
https://github.com/rnkn/fountain-mode
@end macro
@macro theauthor
@w{Paul W. Rankin}
@end macro
@macro authoremail
@email{hello@@paulwrankin.com}
@end macro

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2021--2023 Paul W. Rankin

The following people contributed to this documentation:@*
Paul W. Rankin, Kohl Sudduth, Sandra Snan
@end copying

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Fountain Mode
@subtitle @w{GNU Emacs} major mode for screenwriting in Fountain markup
@author Paul W. Rankin
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnottex

@node Top
@top Fountain Mode

@program{} is a screenwriting (and playwriting) program for
@w{GNU Emacs} version 24.4 or later. The Fountain markup format is a
plain-text format designed to be easily readable and editable,
portable and future-proof, and to look as much like a script as
possible.

This is the @program{} Manual updated for version @version{}.


The public @program{} code repository is hosted on
@uref{@repository{}, GitHub}.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::            The pitch.
* Installation::        Getting started.
* Script Elements::     The constituent parts of Fountain.
* Outlining::           Organize your script in pieces.
* Navigation::          Fly through your script with ease.
* Syntax Highlighting:: Differentiate all the elements with colors.
* Element Aligning::    WYSIWYG visual indentation of script elements.
* Text Emphasis::       Bold, italic and underline.
* Do What I Mean::      Traditional TAB-style autocompletion.
* Autocompletion::      Completion of frequently used text.
* Scene Numbering::     Adding numbers to a script scenes.
* Pagination::          Counting a navigating script pages.
* Exporting::           Sharing your great writing!
* FAQ::                 You got questions? We got answers.
* Contact::             Help is never far away.
* Indexes::             What are you looking for?
@end menu

@node Overview
@unnumbered Overview

@program{} combines the simplicity of Fountain syntax with the
extensibility of Emacs. @program{} is a major mode for Emacs, which
is to say it is a program that runs inside Emacs --- the extensible,
customizable, free/libre text editor. It enables the writer to engage
with all aspects of realizing a screenplay --- story development,
outlining, drafting, and rewriting.

To quickly get up to speed with Fountain syntax, memorize the syntax for
the six most used elements of the screenplay format: @ref{Scene Headings},
@ref{Action}, @ref{Characters}, @ref{Dialogue}, @ref{Parentheticals}, and
@ref{Transitions}.

Then learn how to outline a script. @xref{Section Headings}. This will
be familiar for anyone who has used Markdown, as the syntax is the
same. Sections allow you to easily show or hide and reorder large
parts of a script.

There are additional Fountain syntax elements to allow for
brainstorming, capturing ideas and omitting a part of the script
without deleting it. @xref{Synopses}, @ref{Notes}, and @ref{Comments}.
These elements are not usually included in the formatted output.

All of @program{}'s capabilities are accessible via the menu, and all
customization is performed via the @code{Fountain} option group.
@xref{(emacs) Customization Groups}.

@node Installation
@unnumbered Installation

The latest stable release of @program{} is available as an Emacs
package via
@uref{https://stable.melpa.org/#/fountain-mode, MELPA-stable}.

In order to install packages via MELPA-stable, you'll first need to
add it to your package archives:

@example
M-x customize-option RET package-archives RET
@end example

Insert an entry named @code{melpa-stable} with the URL
@code{https://stable.melpa.org/packages/}

You can then find the latest stable version of @code{fountain-mode} in
the list returned by:

@example
M-x list-packages RET
@end example

If you like to live on the bleeding edge and prefer the latest but
perhaps unstable version, do the above using
@uref{https://melpa.org/#/fountain-mode, MELPA}.
Unless you are already familiar with debugging Elisp code, it is
strongly encouraged to use the stable version.

@menu
* Requirements::        Do you have what it takes?
* Advanced Installation::   For the pros.
@end menu

@node Requirements
@unnumberedsec Requirements

@program{} is compatible with Emacs version 24.4 and later.

For Emacs versions older than 26.1, there is a bug in the @code{outline}
library. This will be automatically patched provided
@code{fountain-patch-emacs-bugs} is non-nil and Emacs is installed with
its Elisp source files.

For Emacs versions older than 25.1, the @code{seq} library will need to
be installed; if you install using the Emacs package management system,
@code{seq} will be installed automatically.

@node Advanced Installation
@unnumberedsec Advanced Installation

Download the
@uref{https://github.com/rnkn/fountain-mode/tags, latest release},
move this file into your @code{load-path} and add the following to your
@code{init.el} file:

@example
(require 'fountain-mode)
@end example

If for some reason you can't or won't use GitHub, the latest release
is @uref{https://fountain-mode.org/src/, available at here}.

If you wish to contribute to or alter @program{}'s code, clone the
repository into your load-path and require as above:

@example
git clone @repository{}
@end example

The code repository is currently only available via GitHub.

@xref{(emacs) Lisp Libraries}.

@node Script Elements
@unnumbered Script Elements

The central idea of writing a script in Fountain is that you should be
able to just start writing --- as long as your text looks like a script,
you should get correctly formatted output.

@quotation n.b.
@program{} uses the @w{Fountain 1.1} syntax specification.
While some programs use custom additions to the specification, for the
greatest cross-compatibility, stick with the 1.1 spec.
@end quotation

@menu
* Metadata::            Key-value info at the top of your script.
* Section Headings::    Outline your script with @code{#}-prefixed headings.
* Scene Headings::      Lines beginning with @code{INT}, @code{EXT}, etc.
* Action::              Anything that's not another element.
* Characters::          Names are in ALL-CAPS.
* Dialogue::            Text following character elements.
* Parentheticals::      Text inside (parens) within dialogue.
* Transitions::         Uppercase lines ending in @code{TO:}.
* Notes::               Text within @code{[[} double brackets @code{]]}.
* Synopses::            Lines beginning with @code{=}.
* Center Text::         Put your titles @code{>} between these @code{<}.
* Comments::            C-style multi-line comments (aka ``Boneyard'').
@end menu

@node Metadata
@unnumberedsec Metadata

A Fountain script usually starts with some metadata stating the basic
information about the script. These are colon-separated key-value pairs
at the start of a file:

@example
key: value
@end example

Other Fountain-compatible programs may refer to this as ``title page''
info, but metadata can store information not related to or present on
the title page.

Calling @code{auto-insert} will guide you through adding the most common
Fountain metadata, prompting with likely defaults:

@itemize
@item
@code{title} is pretty obvious, and will default to base-name of the
current buffer.
@item
@code{credit} is not actually your name, but the type of credit given to
the @code{author}, e.g. @code{written by} or @code{screenplay by}.
@item
@code{author} is you or your writing team, and defaults to the value of
variable @code{user-full-name}.
@item
@code{format} will override the value of
@code{fountain-default-script-format} for the current script. Accepted
values are: @code{screenplay}, @code{teleplay}, @code{stageplay}.
@item
@code{date} defaults to the current date in your locale's ``preferred''
format.
@item
@code{source}, for if you're writing an adaptation.
@item
@code{contact} is useful if the writer wants readers to ever get in
touch to make the film/play!
@end itemize

All metadata keys can take either a single line of input following the
colon, or a newline followed multiple lines indented with whitespace:

@example
author:
    Mary Maryland
    and
    Alan Smithee
@end example

Metadata keys are case-insensitive, e.g. @samp{Title} is the same as
@samp{title}.

@node Section Headings
@unnumberedsec Section Headings

Section headings are lines beginning with @code{#} (number sign). There
are five levels of section headings, with additional @code{#} characters
demoting the outline level of a heading.

@example
# Top-Level Heading

## Sub-Heading

### Sub-Sub-Heading
@end example

@xref{Outlining}.

@node Scene Headings
@unnumberedsec Scene Headings

Scene headings begin with a prefix, specified in
@code{fountain-scene-heading-prefix-list}, which defaults to:

@example
INT, EXT, EST, INT./EXT., INT/EXT, I/E
@end example

Each prefix may be followed by a dot and/or a space, so the following
are equivalent:

@example
INT HOUSE - DAY

INT. HOUSE - DAY
@end example

@defopt fountain-scene-heading-prefix-list
This options allows setting your own scene heading prefixes. These
entries are case-insensitive.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-scene-heading-suffix-list
This options allows setting your own scene heading suffixes (or
time-of-day). These entries are case-insensitive.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-scene-heading-suffix-separator
This option allows setting the separator (a regular expression)
between the scene location and time of day. The default @samp{ --? }
allows either one or two dashes.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-auto-upcase-scene-headings
Enabling this option will automatically upcase text after a scene
heading prefix as you type.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-double-space-scene-headings
Enabling this option will display two blank lines above scene
headings, regardless of what's in the file. n.b. This option does not
affect calculation of pagination.
@end defopt

@xref{Scene Heading Completion}.

@node Action
@unnumberedsec Action

Action is the easiest Fountain element --- anything that isn't parsed as
another element is considered action.

Sometimes you may write some action that will be unintentionally parsed
as dialogue, for example:

@example
Jack examines his shopping list...

BLACK SHIRT
BLACK PANTS
EXPLOSIVES
MAP
@end example

Here @code{BLACK SHIRT} would be parsed as a character, who then shouts
``BLACK PANTS!...'' We don't want that. To prevent this, prefix the
first line with @code{!} (exclamation mark). This is known as a
``forced'' element.

@example
!BLACK SHIRT
BLACK PANTS
EXPLOSIVES
MAP
@end example

@node Characters
@unnumberedsec Characters

To write a character name to cue some dialogue, type the name in
uppercase (ALL-CAPS).

@example
JOLENE
@end example

The next line will be parsed as dialogue.

Sometimes you might want to include lowercase letters in a character
name. To force a line as a character name, prefix it with @code{@@} (at
sign).

@example
@@JOLENE McCLOGGS
@end example

Some Fountain tools may not parse a line as a character name if the
extension contains lowercase letters, requiring the @code{@@} prefix.

@example
@@JOLENE (cont'd)
@end example

If you are just writing the character's name within action, type the
character's name normally.

@example
Jolene
@end example

If you prefer to write character names within action in uppercase,
that's fine too. The following will still be parsed as action.

@example
JOLENE throws the chair at PHILIP.
@end example

@defopt fountain-character-extension-list
This option allows setting your own character extensions, e.g. ``(O.C.)''.
@end defopt

@xref{Character Name Completion}.

@node Dialogue
@unnumberedsec Dialogue

Dialogue is any text following @ref{Characters}. Just enter a newline
and the next text entered will be parsed as dialogue.

@example
JOLENE
Have you seen trouble? I seem to have misplaced it.
@end example

@node Parentheticals
@unnumberedsec Parentheticals

Any text inside parentheticals and within dialogue is parsed as a
parenthetical element, e.g.

@example
JOLENE
(concerned)
Have you seen trouble? I seem to have misplaced it.
@end example

@xref{Autocompletion}.

@node Transitions
@unnumberedsec Transitions

A transition is any line ending with @code{TO:}, or you can force a
transition by prefixing it with @code{>}.

@defopt fountain-trans-suffix-list
This option allows setting your own transition suffixes, so that lines
ending in these will be parsed as transitions. These entries are
case-insensitive.
@end defopt

@node Notes
@unnumberedsec Notes

Text enclosed in @code{[[ ]]} (double brackets) is parsed as a note,
and is generally not included in export. Use these for keeping draft
notes, research, feedback, etc.

@table @kbd

@item C-c C-z
@kindex C-c C-z
This will insert a note based on @code{fountain-note-template} (see
below) beneath the current element, or if the region is active,
surround the region with note delimiters
(@code{fountain-insert-note}).
@findex insert-note

@end table

@defopt fountain-note-template
Template for inserting a new note. Passed to @code{format-spec} with
the following specification:

@itemize
@item @code{%u user-login-name}
@item @code{%n user-full-name}
@item @code{%e user-mail-address}
@item @code{%x} date in locale’s preferred format
@item @code{%F} date in ISO format
@item @code{%P} leave point here
@end itemize

The default @code{%P - %n %x} inserts something like:

@example
[[ | - Alan Smithee 12/31/2017 ]]"
@end example
@end defopt

@node Synopses
@unnumberedsec Synopses

A synopsis is a handy way to detail what a scene or section is about. A
synopsis element is simply a line beginning with @code{=} (equals sign).

@example
INT. FISHING TRAWLER - DAY
= The men eat the shark they caught.
@end example

Synopses are not included by most export tools.

@node Center Text
@unnumberedsec Center Text

Any text surrounded with @code{>} and @code{<} (greater and less than
signs) will be centered in output, e.g.:

@example
> Once Upon a Time... <
@end example

@node Comments
@unnumberedsec Comments

Text that are in C-style comments, /* like this */, is not exported by
export tools. It's text that's ``in the boneyard''. Unlike other
Fountain syntax, these comments can span newlines and other
formatting; structurally, it's as if the text were removed.

This ``boneyard'' is for text that you're on the brink of removing, or
drafts that you aren't ready to ``uncomment'' and include yet, or just
anything else you want to ignore.

If you instead just want to annotate your screenplay, @ref{Notes}
or @ref{Synopses}.

@node Outlining
@unnumbered Outlining
@cindex outlining
@kindex TAB
@kindex S-TAB

Acts and sequences can be given meaningful section titles, giving you
an overview of the story structure.

There are five levels of section headings. Scene headings count as the
sixth level headings.

Cycle an individual subtree visibility with @kbd{TAB}. Cycle global
outline visibility with @kbd{S-TAB} (shift-tab) or @kbd{C-u TAB}.

@deffn Command fountain-insert-section-heading
Bound to @kbd{M-RET}, insert an empty section heading at the current
outline level.
@end deffn
@kindex M-RET
@findex insert-section-heading

@deffn Command fountain-outline-to-indirect-buffer
If you want to focus on discrete sections of your script you can open
these in indirect buffers. Bound to @kbd{C-c C-x b}, this command
clones the current section or scene to indirect buffer.

@xref{(emacs) Indirect Buffers}
@end deffn
@kindex C-c C-x b
@findex outline-to-indirect-buffer

@defopt fountain-pop-up-indirect-windows
Set this to control how indirect buffer windows are opened. Sometimes
you might want to limit your focus to one sequence, other times you
might want to look at two scenes in windows side-by-side. Set this
option to spawn a new window.
@end defopt

@node Navigation
@unnumbered Navigation

Because a Fountain script is structured text, there are plenty of
ways to quickly move to where you want to be.

@table @kbd

@item C-M-n
@kindex C-M-n
@findex outline-next
Move to the next visible scene or section heading
(@code{fountain-outline-next}).

@item C-M-p
@kindex C-M-n
@findex outline-previous
Move to the previous visible scene or section heading
(@code{fountain-outline-previous}).

@item C-M-f
@kindex C-M-f
@findex outline-forward
Move forward to the next visible scene or section heading at same
outline level (@code{fountain-outline-forward})

@item C-M-b
@kindex C-M-b
@findex outline-backward
Move backward to the previous visible scene or section heading at the
same outline level (@code{fountain-outline-backward}).

@item C-M-a
@kindex C-M-a
@findex outline-beginning
Move to the beginning of the current scene or section
(@code{fountain-outline-beginning}).

@item C-M-u
@kindex C-M-u
@findex outline-up
Move up to the parent section heading (@code{fountain-outline-up}).

@item M-n
@kindex M-n
@findex forward-character
Move to next character name (@code{fountain-forward-character}).

@item M-p
@kindex M-p
@findex backward-character
Move to previous character name (@code{fountain-backward-character}).

@item C-x ]
@kindex C-x ]
@findex forward-page
Move to next page. This command does not move by one page but actually
moves to the next page-break point in the text pagination properties
(@code{fountain-forward-page}).

@item C-x [
@kindex C-x [
@findex backward-page
Move to previous page (@code{fountain-backward-page}).

@item M-g s
@kindex M-g s
@findex goto-scene
Prompt for a scene number string and move to the specified scene. If
scenes are numbered, this command will take you to the scene matching
that string, otherwise it will count the scenes from beginning of the
accessible buffer, recalculating when encountering a numbered scene
(@code{fountain-goto-scene}).

@item M-g p
@kindex M-g p
@findex goto-page
Prompt for a number and move to the specified page. This command does
not actually count pages but uses the text pagination properties
(@code{fountain-goto-page}).
@end table

@node Syntax Highlighting
@unnumbered Syntax Highlighting

In @program{}, each Fountain element can have Font Lock syntax
highlighting toggled individually --- or none at all.
@xref{(emacs) Font Lock}.

In addition to faces for specific elements, @program{} uses an Emacs
feature called face remapping, which means the @code{default} face is
displayed using the @code{fountain} face. This allows you to customize
the @code{fountain} face just for @program{} buffers. @xref{(emacs) Face
Customization}.

@defopt fountain-highlight-elements
This option is a list of Fountain elements to be highlighted.
@end defopt

@deffn Command fountain-toggle-hide-emphasis-markup
Bound to @kbd{C-c C-x *} this command will toggle the display of text
emphasis markup. @xref{Text Emphasis}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command fountain-toggle-hide-element-markup
Bound to @kbd{C-c C-x !}, this command, like above, will toggle the
display of element markup. This means the leadings characters in
section headings and forced elements.
@end deffn

@node Element Aligning
@unnumbered Element Aligning

In addition to syntax highlighting, @program{} has the ability to
automatically align, or indent, script elements, so your script looks
more like real script. This is display only and does not change the
file contents, and can be turned off if you don't like it.

@defopt fountain-align-elements
Whether to automatically align elements.
@end defopt

Different script formats have different alignment, so each element can
be aligned on a per-format basis --- see the Customize group
@code{fountain-align}.

@node Text Emphasis
@unnumbered Text Emphasis

Text can be underlined, italic, bold, or a combination thereof.
Demarcate emphasized text with:

@itemize
@item @code{_underscores_} for underline,
@item @code{*single asterisks*} for @i{italic},
@item and @code{**double asterisks**} for @b{bold}.
@end itemize

For the writer pursists who want to work the way our ancestors did on
typewriters, stick to underlining.

@node Do What I Mean
@unnumbered Do What I Mean
@kindex TAB

Like many screenwriting programs, in @program{} pressing @kbd{TAB}
will do the most convenient thing based on context.

The most common use is triggering autocompletion. If the point is at a
blank line or the end of a non-blank line, pressing @kbd{TAB} will
call @code{completion-at-point}. @xref{Autocompletion}.

In @program{}, @kbd{TAB} is also used to control outline visibility. So
if point is at a scene or section heading, it will cycle visibility of
that scene of section between collapsed and expanded. To allow for
more control over outline cycling, if @kbd{TAB} is prefixed with
@code{ARG}, call @code{fountain-outline-cycle} and pass @code{ARG}.
@xref{Outlining}.

@kbd{TAB} also helps working with parentheticals. If the point is at a
blank line within dialogue, it will insert a parenthetical; if the
point is inside an empty parenthetical, it will delete it, or if
inside a non-empty parenthetical, move to a newline.

If the point is at or inside a note, @kbd{TAB} will cycle visibility
of that note between collapsed and expanded.

This all might seem complicated, but the idea is by covering all the
cases you don't have to think about it.

@deffn Command fountain-dwim
This is the command you'll use the most. Bound to @kbd{TAB}, it will
perform the most convenient action based on the current context.
@end deffn
@findex dwim

@node Autocompletion
@unnumbered Autocompletion

One of the nice things about using a dedicated screenwriting program
is that it helps you type less of the things you need to type a
lot. @program{} provides autocompletion for scene headings and character
names.

@deffn Command fountain-completion-update
This command, bound to @kbd{C-c C-x a} will update the completion
candidates for current buffer.
@end deffn
@kindex C-c C-x a
@findex completion-update

@menu
* Scene Heading Completion::    Complete times and places.
* Character Name Completion::   For every time someone speaks.
@end menu

@node Scene Heading Completion
@unnumberedsec Scene Heading Completion
@kindex TAB

If the line has a partial scene heading, i.e. it begins with a prefix
from @code{fountain-scene-heading-prefix-list} like so:

@example
INT. |
@end example

@kbd{TAB} will offer completions of previously used locations.

If the cursor is at the time-of-day, like this:

@example
INT. SUBMARINE - |
INT. SUBMARINE -- |
@end example

@kbd{TAB} will offer completions from
@code{fountain-scene-heading-suffix-list}.

@node Character Name Completion
@unnumberedsec Character Name Completion
@kindex TAB

The most basic use of this is when pressing @kbd{TAB} on an empty line.
If there's an empty line above, this will offer to autocomplete a
character name. Character names are suggested in the order:

@enumerate
@item
the second-to-last previously speaking character within the current
scene, i.e. a character's conversational partner;
@item
the last speaking character within the current scene, i.e. a character
continuing speaking;
@item
the remaining characters in the script in order of frequency (default if
there are not yet speaking characters in the current scene).
@end enumerate

@kbd{TAB} will also offer character name completion if a line has a
partial character name.

When the cursor is after a character name and opening parenthesis,
@kbd{TAB} will offer completions from
@code{fountain-character-extension-list} plus
@code{fountain-continued-dialog-string}.

@example
MARY (|
@end example

When the cursor is at an empty line within dialogue, @kbd{TAB} will add
an empty parenthetical.

@example
MARY
|
I'm hungry.
@end example

Likewise, if the cursor is within an empty parenthetical, @kbd{TAB}
will remove the parenthetical.

@example
MARY
(|)
I'm hungry.
@end example

When the cursor is at the end of a non-empty parenthetical, either
inside or outside the closing parenthesis, @kbd{TAB} will move to the
beginning of the next line if the next line is non-empty, otherwise it
will insert a newline.

@example
MARY
(angry|)
I'm hungry.
@end example

When the cursor is at the end of a non-empty line of dialogue, and the
value of @code{fountain-dwim-insert-next-character} is non-nil,
@kbd{TAB} will insert an empty line and the second-to-last previously
speaking character.

@example
MARY
(angry)
I'm hungry.|
@end example

The cursor will be left at the end of the next character, allowing
successive presses of @kbd{TAB} to cycling through additional character
completion candidates.

@example
MARY
(angry)
I'm hungry.

JOHN|
@end example

@node Scene Numbering
@unnumbered Scene Numbering

Scene numbers are appended to scene headings between @code{# #}
(hash). @program{} can automatically add scene numbers for you.

@deffn Command fountain-add-scene-numbers
Bound to @kbd{C-c C-x #}, add scene numbers to scene headings in
current buffer. Remove scene numbers by prefixing with @kbd{C-u}.
@end deffn
@kindex C-c C-x #

Whether scene numbers are applied or not, you can still navigate by
scene number. @xref{Navigation}.

Scene numbers can be displayed in the window margins.

@defopt fountain-display-scene-numbers-in-margin
Display scene numbers in left and right margins.
@end defopt

@node Pagination
@unnumbered Pagination

@program{} features internal pagination. This is achieved by
periodically calculating where page breaks occur in the whole buffer
and applying pagination properties to the text. When the text is
changed enough to invalidate these properties they are recalculated.

@defopt fountain-pagination-max-change
Maximum change in page characters before invalidating pagination. Set
this to a lower value to get more accurate pagination, high if you
find the updates annoying.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-page-size
An important factor in calculating pagination is the page size. This
is the target page size. Valid options are @code{letter} or @code{a4}.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-page-max-lines
This option specifies how many lines fit on each of the page sizes.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-pagination-break-sentences
Whether pagination will break pages within sentences, or only at
sentence ends.
@end defopt

You can optionally show the current page and total page count in the
mode line by enabling @code{which-function-mode}, @xref {(emacs) Which Function}.
This will display something like this:

@example
[Page 31 of 108]
@end example

@deffn Command fountain-count-pages
Bound to @kbd{C-c C-p}, return both the current page and the total
page count of the current buffer.
@end deffn
@kindex C-c C-p
@findex count-pages

You can also navigate by page number. @xref{Navigation}.        

@node Exporting
@unnumbered Exporting

@program{} can export to PostScript or PDF using the Troff format as an
intermediary. This requires only a @code{troff} program on your
system, such as
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/groff/, GNU roff}.
One advantage of this is that the internal pagination will match the
output exactly.

Alternatively you can export using an external command-line program,
which is covered further below.

@deffn Command fountain-export-troff
This command, bound to @kbd{C-c C-e t}, will export using the internal
exporter and typeset using a @code{troff} program.
@end deffn
@kindex C-c C-e t

@deffn Command fountain-export-view
This command, bound to @kbd{C-c C-v}, attempts to open the last
exported file. This works by finding the other most recently modified
file in the current directory matching the current file base-name.
@end deffn
@kindex C-c C-v
@findex export-view

@defopt fountain-export-format
This is the target format for internal Troff export. Valid options are
Postscript (@code{ps}) or PDF (@code{pdf}).
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-export-troff-command
The name of the @code{troff} program on your system.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-export-troff-extra-options
Extra option flags passed to the @code{troff} program. The default
tells @code{troff} to use UTF-8.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-export-title-page
Whether to include a title page in export. This option only affects
the internal Troff export.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-export-number-first-page
Whether to include a page number on the first page in export. This
option only affects the internal Troff export.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-export-scene-heading-format
A list specifying the export scene heading format. Available options
are zero or more of @code{bold}, @code{double-space}, and
@code{underline}. This option only affects the internal Troff export.
@end defopt

@menu
* External Programs::       Export using an external program.
@end menu

@node External Programs
@unnumberedsec Exporting Using an External Program

As an alternative to the internal export system you can use an
external command-line program.

Here are some recommended export programs:

@itemize
@item
@uref{https://github.com/ifrost/afterwriting-labs, Afterwriting}
@item
@uref{https://github.com/Wraparound/wrap, Wrap}
@item
@uref{https://github.com/vilcans/screenplain, Screenplain}
@footnote{Requires @uref{https://www.reportlab.com, ReportLab} for PDF
export.}
@item
@uref{https://github.com/olivertaylor/Textplay, Textplay}
@footnote{Requires @uref{https://www.princexml.com, PrinceXML} for PDF
export.}
@end itemize

By defining an ``export profile'' you can easily interface with an
external program from within Emacs. A profile is essentially a shell
command, interpolated with a selection of values:

@itemize
@item
@code{%b} is the @code{buffer-file-name}
@item
@code{%B} is the @code{buffer-file-name} sans extension
@item
@code{%n} is the @code{user-full-name}
@item
@code{%t} is the title (@xref{Metadata}.)
@item
@code{%a} is the author (@xref{Metadata}.)
@item
@code{%F} is the current date in ISO format
@item
@code{%x} is the current date in your locale's ``preferred'' format
@end itemize

The default command profiles are only intended as examples. You are
encouraged to edit/replace these to suit your own needs.

@deffn Command fountain-export-command
This command, bound to @kbd{C-c C-e e}, will prompt for an export
profile. The first profile is considered default, so just hitting RET
is a quick way to export in your usual way.
@end deffn
@kindex C-c C-e e
@findex export-command

@defopt fountain-export-command-profiles
This option contains the list of shell command profiles for exporting.
The first profile is considered the default.
@end defopt

@node FAQ
@unnumbered FAQ

@menu
* How do I get a scratchpad?::
* How do I get tree-style navigation?::
* How do I insert a marker?::
* How do I include additional files?::
* How do I support your work?::
@end menu

@node How do I get a scratchpad?
@unnumberedsec How do I get a scratchpad?

Emacs has its own ephemeral @code{*scratch*} buffer. Usually this is
in Lisp Interaction Mode, but it can be set to any mode, including
@program{}.

If you would like a persistent scratchpad file, the author maintains
the Emacs package @uref{https://github.com/rnkn/side-notes, Side
Notes} to display and edit a notes file in a side window.

@node How do I get tree-style navigation?
@unnumberedsec How do I get tree-style navigation?

Emacs uses a buffer definition navigation facility called Imenu. There
are several packages to navigate Imenu to your liking. The author
maintains the Emacs package @uref{https://github.com/rnkn/side-hustle,
Side Hustle} to display and navigate the buffer Imenu in a tree style
in a side window.

@xref{(emacs) Imenu}.

@node How do I insert a marker?
@unnumberedsec How do I insert a marker?

Emacs has several different facilities to navigate around arbitrary
points in a buffer.

The first and most obvious is the mark. Emacs keeps both a buffer
local mark ring and a global mark ring. You can set the mark at the
current point with @kbd{C-SPC} and it will be recorded in both rings.
You can then ``pop'' back through the points in the local mark ring
with @kbd{C-u C-SPC}, or through the points in the global mark ring
with @kbd{C-x C-SPC}. The mark rings do not persist across Emacs
sessions. @xref{(emacs) Mark}.

The next is registers. Registers can save points, but also text,
numbers, and a bunch of other things. For now we'll just focus on
points. You can record a point in a register with @kbd{C-x r SPC X}
where @kbd{X} is any keyboard character. Registers do not persist across
Emacs sessions. @xref{(emacs) Registers}.

You can also always insert a note with arbitrary text, e.g.
@code{[[marker: next]]}, and this will be navigable via Imenu.
@xref{Notes}.

@node How do I include additional files?
@unnumberedsec How do I include additional files?

There is not a way specific to @program{} to include additional files.
The author's advice is to leverage the power of other Unix tools. One
way is to use a Makefile, like this:

@example
DRAFT    = Memoryhouse.fountain

INCLUDE += prologue.fountain
INCLUDE += act_1.fountain
INCLUDE += act_2.fountain
INCLUDE += act_3.fountain
INCLUDE += denouement.fountain

draft:
	cat $(INCLUDE) > $(DRAFT)
@end example

A more complicated way could use M4:

@example
title: __TITLE__
credit: written by
author: __AUTHOR__

m4_include(prologue.fountain)

m4_include(act_1.fountain)

m4_include(act_2.fountain)

m4_include(act_3.fountain)

m4_include(denouement.fountain)
@end example

@node How do I support your work?
@unnumberedsec How do I support your work?

Financial reward is not a consideration in maintaining @program{}, but
if you would like to support development, donations are graciously
accepted via
@uref{https://github.com/sponsors/rnkn, GitHub}
or
@uref{https://liberapay.com/rnkn/, Liberapay}.

@node Contact
@unnumbered Contact

If you run into any trouble using @program{}, or you have a feature
request, you can email the maintainer @theauthor{} directly at
@authoremail{}.

For bugs, please ensure you can reproduce with:

@example
$ emacs -Q -l fountain-mode.el
@end example

You can also try the @code{#emacs} IRC channel on
@uref{https://libera.chat, Libera.chat} where @program{}'s maintainer
uses the nickname @code{rnkn}, but please note that most other users
on the channel are unlikely to be screenwriters.

Financial reward is not a consideration in maintaining @program{}, but
if you would like to support development, donations are graciously
accepted via
@uref{https://github.com/sponsors/rnkn, GitHub}
or
@uref{https://liberapay.com/rnkn/, Liberapay}.

@node Indexes
@unnumbered Indexes

@menu
* Key Index::
* Index of Commands::
* Index of User Options::
@end menu

@node Key Index
@unnumberedsec Key Index
@printindex ky

@node Index of Commands
@unnumberedsec Index of Commands
@printindex fn

@node Index of User Options
@unnumberedsec Index of User Options
@printindex vr

@bye
