\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename fountain-mode.info
@settitle Fountain Mode
@c @documentencoding UTF-8
@c @documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Fountain Mode: (fountain-mode). Write screenplays and stageplays.
@end direntry

@c macros
@macro version
3.4
@end macro
@macro repository
https://github.com/rnkn/fountain-mode
@end macro
@macro tbc
Sorry, this node is not yet written. You can help by submitting a patch!
@end macro

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2021 Paul W. Rankin

The following people contributed to this documentation:@*
Paul W. Rankin, Kohl Sudduth
@end copying

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Fountain Mode
@subtitle GNU Emacs major mode for scriptwriting in Fountain markup
@author Paul W. Rankin
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnottex

@node Top
@top Fountain Mode

@quotation n.b.
This manual is a work in progress with many parts still missing. Please
consult the help functions within Emacs for current documentation.
@end quotation

Fountain Mode is a scriptwriting (both screenplays and stageplays)
program for GNU Emacs version 24.4 or later. The Fountain markup format
is a plain-text format designed to be easily readable and editable,
portable and future-proof, and to look as much like a script as
possible.

This is the Fountain Mode Manual updated for version @version.

@ifhtml
Check out the 
@uref{https://fountain-mode.org/images/gallery.html, screenshot gallery}.
@emph{Please send me your screenshots!}
@end ifhtml

The public Fountain Mode repository is hosted on
@uref{@repository, GitHub}.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                The pitch.
* Installation::                Getting started.
* Script Elements::             The constituent parts of Fountain.
* Outlining::                   Organize your script in pieces.
* Navigation::                  Fly through your script with ease.
* Syntax Highlighting::         Differentiate all the elements with colors.
* Element Aligning::            WYSIWYG visual indentation of script elements.
* Text Emphasis::               Bold, italic and underline.
* Autocompletion::              Completion of frequently used text.
* Do What I Mean::              Traditional TAB-style autocompletion.
* Scene Numbering::             Adding numbers to a script scenes.
* Pagination::                  Counting a navigating script pages.
* Exporting::                   Sharing your great writing!
* Indexes::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@unnumbered Introduction

Fountain Mode combines the simplicity of Fountain syntax with the
extensibility of Emacs. Fountain Mode is a major mode for Emacs, which
is to say it is a program that runs inside Emacs --- the extensible,
customizable, free/libre text editor. It enables the writer to engage
with all aspects of realizing a screenplay --- story development,
outlining, drafting, rewriting --- and to work in such a way that the
hands never need to leave the keyboard.

After learning a handful of syntax rules and a few keyboard shortcuts,
nothing stands between the writer and the screenplay. The friction
between thought and its expression on the page lessens, allowing the
writer to more readily access a state of relaxed concentration that is
conducive to creativity --- all the writer needs to do is write.

To quickly get up to speed with Fountain syntax, memorize the rules for
the six most used elements of the screenplay format: @ref{Scene Headings},
@ref{Action}, @ref{Characters}, @ref{Dialogue}, @ref{Parentheticals}, and
@ref{Transitions}.

Then learn how to use @ref{Section Headings} to outline a story. This will be
familiar for anyone who has used Markdown, as the syntax is the same.
Sections allow you to easily show or hide and reorder large parts of a
script.

There are additional Fountain syntax elements to allow for
brainstorming, capturing ideas and omitting a part of the script without
deleting it. These include @ref{Synopses}, @ref{Notes}, and
@ref{Comments}. These elements are not usually included in the formatted
output.

@node Installation
@unnumbered Installation

The latest stable release of Fountain Mode is available as an Emacs
package via
@uref{https://stable.melpa.org/#/fountain-mode, MELPA-stable}.
In order to install packages via MELPA-stable, you'll first need to add
it to your package archives:

@code{M-x customize-option RET package-archives RET}

Insert an entry named @code{melpa-stable} with the URL
@code{https://stable.melpa.org/packages/}

You can then find the latest stable version of @code{fountain-mode} in
the list returned by:

@example
M-x list-packages RET
@end example

If you like to live on the bleeding edge and prefer the latest but
perhaps unstable version, do the above using
@uref{https://melpa.org/#/fountain-mode, MELPA}.
Unless you are already familiar with debugging Elisp code, you are
strongly encouraged to use the stable version.

@menu
* Requirements::                Do you have what it takes?
* Advanced Installation::       For the pros.
@end menu

@node Requirements
@unnumberedsec Requirements

Fountain Mode is compatible with Emacs version 24.4 and later.

For Emacs versions older than 26.1, there is a bug in the @code{outline}
library. This will be automatically patched provided
@code{fountain-patch-emacs-bugs} is non-nil and Emacs is installed with
its Elisp source files.

For Emacs versions older than 25.1, the @code{seq} library will need to
be installed; if you install using the Emacs package management system,
@code{seq} will be installed automatically.

@node Advanced Installation
@unnumberedsec Advanced Installation

Download the
@uref{https://github.com/rnkn/fountain-mode/releases/latest, latest release},
move this file into your load-path and add the following to your
@code{init.el} file:

@example
(require 'fountain-mode)
@end example

If you wish to contribute to or alter Fountain Mode's code, clone the
repository into your load-path and require as above:

@example
git clone @repository
@end example

@node Script Elements
@unnumbered Script Elements

The central idea of writing a script in Fountain is that you should be
able to just start writing --- as long as your text looks like a script,
you should get correctly formatted output.

@quotation n.b.
Fountain Mode uses the Fountain 1.1 syntax specification. While some
programs use custom additions to the specification, these aren't
considered official. For the greatest cross-compatibility, stick with
the 1.1 spec.
@end quotation

@menu
* Metadata::                    Key-value info at the top of your script.
* Section Headings::            Outline your script with @code{#}-prefixed headings.
* Scene Headings::              Lines beginning with @code{INT}, @code{EXT}, etc.
* Action::                      Anything that's not another element.
* Characters::                  Names are in ALL-CAPS.
* Dialogue::                    Text following character elements.
* Parentheticals::              Text inside (parens) within dialogue.
* Transitions::                 Uppercase lines ending in @code{TO:}.
* Notes::                       Text within @code{[[} double brackets @code{]]}.
* Synopses::                    Lines beginning with @code{=}.
* Center Text::                 Put your titles @code{>} between these @code{<}.
* Comments::                    C-style multi-line comments (aka ``Boneyard'').
@end menu

@node Metadata
@unnumberedsec Metadata

A Fountain script usually starts with some metadata stating the basic
information about the script. These are colon-separated key-value pairs
at the start of a file, e.g. @code{key: value}.

Other Fountain-compatible programs may refer to this as ``title page''
info, but metadata can store information not related to or present on
the title page.

Calling @code{auto-insert} will guide you through adding the most common
Fountain metadata, prompting with likely defaults:

@itemize
@item
@code{title} is pretty obvious, and will default to base-name of the
current buffer.
@item
@code{credit} is not actually your name, but the type of credit given to
the @code{author}, e.g. @code{written by} or @code{screenplay by}.
@item
@code{author} is you or your writing team, and defaults to the value of
variable @code{user-full-name}.
@item
@code{format} will override the value of
@code{fountain-default-script-format} for the current script. Accepted
values are: @code{screenplay}, @code{teleplay}, @code{stageplay}.
@item
@code{date} defaults to the current date in your locale's ``preferred''
format.
@item
@code{source}, for if you're writing an adaptation.
@item
@code{contact} is useful if the writer wants readers to ever get in
touch to make the film/play!
@end itemize

All metadata keys can take either a single line of input following the
colon, or a newline followed multiple lines indented with whitespace:

@example
author:
    Mary Maryland
    and
    Alan Smithee
@end example

Metadata keys are case-insensitive, e.g. @code{Title} is the same as
@code{title}.

@node Section Headings
@unnumberedsec Section Headings

Section headings are lines beginning with @code{#} (number sign). There
are five levels of section headings, with additional @code{#} characters
demoting the outline level of a heading.

@example
# Top-Level Heading

## Sub-Heading

### Sub-Sub-Heading
@end example

@xref{Outlining}.

@node Scene Headings
@unnumberedsec Scene Headings

A scene begins with a scene heading.

Scene headings begin with a prefix, specified in
@code{fountain-scene-heading-prefix-list}, which defaults to
@code{INT, EXT, EST, INT./EXT., INT/EXT, I/E}.

Each prefix may be followed by a dot and/or a space, so the following
are equivalent:

@example
INT HOUSE - DAY

INT. HOUSE - DAY
@end example

@defopt fountain-scene-heading-prefix-list
This options allows setting your own scene heading prefixes. These
entries are case-insensitive.
@end defopt

@defopt fountain-scene-heading-suffix-sep
This option allows setting the separator (a regular expression) between
the scene location and time of day. The default @code{ --? } allows either
@samp{ - } or @samp{ -- }.
@end defopt

@xref{Scene Heading Completion}.

@node Action
@unnumberedsec Action

Action is the easiest Fountain element --- anything that isn't parsed as
another element is considered action.

Sometimes you may write some action that will be unintentionally parsed
as dialogue, for example:

@example
Jack examines his shopping list...

BLACK SHIRT
BLACK PANTS
EXPLOSIVES
MAP
@end example

Here @code{BLACK SHIRT} would be parsed as a character, who then shouts
``BLACK PANTS!...'' We don't want that. To prevent this, prefix the
first line with @code{!} (exclamation mark). This is known as a
``forced'' element.

@example
!BLACK SHIRT
BLACK PANTS
EXPLOSIVES
MAP
@end example

@node Characters
@unnumberedsec Characters

To write a character name to cue some dialogue, type the name in
uppercase (ALL-CAPS).

@example
JOLENE
@end example

The next line will be parsed as dialogue.

Sometimes you might want to include lowercase letters in a character
name. To force a line as a character name, prefix it with @code{@@} (at
sign).

@example
@@JOLENE McCLOGGS
@end example

Some Fountain tools may not parse a line as a character name if the
extension contains lowercase letters, requiring the @code{@@} prefix.

@example
@@JOLENE (cont'd)
@end example

If you are just writing the character's name within action, type the
character's name normally.

@example
Jolene
@end example

If you prefer to write character names within action in uppercase,
that's fine too. The following will still be parsed as action.

@example
JOLENE throws the chair at PHILIP.
@end example

@xref{Character Name Completion}.

@node Dialogue
@unnumberedsec Dialogue

Dialogue is any text following @ref{Characters}. Just enter a newline
and the next text entered will be parsed as dialogue.

@example
JOLENE
Have you seen trouble? I seem to have misplaced it.
@end example

@node Parentheticals
@unnumberedsec Parentheticals

Anytime the writer types a (parens) inside of a dialogue block, the text
auto-formats into the correct position.

@example
JOLENE
(concerned)
Have you seen trouble? I seem to have misplaced it.
@end example

@xref{Autocompletion}.

@node Transitions
@unnumberedsec Transitions

@tbc

@node Notes
@unnumberedsec Notes

@tbc

@node Synopses
@unnumberedsec Synopses

A synopsis is a handy way to detail what a scene or section is about. A
synopsis element is simply a line beginning with @code{=} (equals sign).

@example
INT. FISHING TRAWLER - DAY
= The men eat the shark they caught.
@end example

Synopses are not included by most export tools.


@node Center Text
@unnumberedsec Center Text

@tbc

@node Comments
@unnumberedsec Comments

@tbc

@node Outlining
@unnumbered Outlining

There are five levels of section headings. Scene headings count as the
sixth level headings.

Cycle an individual subtree visibility with @code{TAB}. Cycle global
outline visibility with @code{S-TAB} (shift-tab) or @code{C-u TAB}.

Acts, Sequences, Sections, and Scenes can be given meaningful titles,
giving the writer a bird's eye view of the story and structure at a
moments notice.

There are many ways to approach writing a screenplay. Here's one example
of how to use Fountain Mode to Outline a script.

@example
# Act

= Synopsis of an Act. A short summary of all the crazy things that
happen for the next 30-60 pages.

[[ Act One Note. Useful for character motivation and obstacles. Ideas to
remember, etc.]]

## Sequence

= Synopsis of a Sequence.

[[ Sequence Notes. A sequence can be thought of as a series of several
scenes that make up their own mini-story. ]]

INT. SCENE - NIGHT

= Synopsis of a scene.

[[ Notes to remember for a scene, such as the following:
- Who wants what from whom?
- What are they willing to do get what they want?
- What happens if they don't get it? ]]
@end example

Experimenting with different structures can be accomplished by folding a
Section Heading and moving the section to the new desired location using
keyboard shortcuts.

Note: all text contained within the fold is carried to the new location.

Just as there are many ways to tell a story, there are many ways to
outline a script. Because Fountain Mode uses plaintext, it does not
force the writer into a single way of working. Possible structures are
limited only by one's imagination.

If you like to work on discrete pieces of your script you can open these
in indirect buffers.

@defun fountain-outline-to-indirect-buffer
@end defun

@node Navigation
@unnumbered Navigation

@tbc

@node Syntax Highlighting
@unnumbered Syntax Highlighting

@tbc

@node Element Aligning
@unnumbered Element Aligning

@tbc

@node Text Emphasis
@unnumbered Text Emphasis

Text can be underlined, italic, bold, or a combination thereof.

Underlined text is surrounded by @code{_underscores_}.

Italic text is surrounded by @code{*single asterisks*}

Bold text is surrounded by @code{**double asterisks**}

For the writer pursists who want to work the way our ancestors did on
typewriters, stick to underlining.

@node Autocompletion
@unnumbered Autocompletion

One of the nicest things about using a dedicated scriptwriting program
is that it helps you type less of the things you need to type a lot.

@menu
* Scene Heading Completion::    Complete times and places.
* Character Name Completion::   For every time someone speaks.
@end menu

@node Scene Heading Completion
@unnumberedsec Scene Heading Completion

If the line has a partial scene heading, i.e. it begins with a prefix
from @code{fountain-scene-heading-prefix-list} like so:

@example
INT. |
@end example

@code{TAB} will offer completions of previously used locations.

If the cursor is at the time-of-day, like so:

@example
INT. SUBMARINE - |
@end example

@code{TAB} will offer completions from
@code{fountain-scene-heading-suffix-list}.

@node Character Name Completion
@unnumberedsec Character Name Completion

The most basic use of this is when pressing @code{TAB} on an empty line.
If there's an empty line above, this will offer to autocomplete a
character name. Character names are suggested in the order:

@enumerate
@item
the second-to-last previously speaking character within the current
scene, i.e. a character's conversational partner;
@item
the last speaking character within the current scene, i.e. a character
continuing speaking;
@item
the remaining characters in the script in order of frequency (default if
there are not yet speaking characters in the current scene).
@end enumerate

@code{TAB} will also offer character name completion if a line has a
partial character name.

When the cursor is after a character name and opening parenthesis,
@code{TAB} will offer completions from
@code{fountain-character-extension-list} plus
@code{fountain-continued-dialog-string}.

@example
MARY (|
@end example

When the cursor is at an empty line within dialogue, @code{TAB} will add
an empty parenthetical.

@example
MARY
|
I'm hungry.
@end example

Likewise, if the cursor is within an empty parenthetical, @code{TAB}
will remove the parenthetical.

@example
MARY
(|)
I'm hungry.
@end example

When the cursor is at the end of a non-empty parenthetical, either
inside or outside the closing parenthesis, @code{TAB} will move to the
beginning of the next line if the next line is non-empty, otherwise it
will insert a newline.

@example
MARY
(angry|)
I'm hungry.
@end example

When the cursor is at the end of a non-empty line of dialogue, and the
value of @code{fountain-dwim-insert-next-character} is non-nil,
@code{TAB} will insert an empty line and the second-to-last previously
speaking character.

@example
MARY
(angry)
I'm hungry.|
@end example

The cursor will be left at the end of the next character, allowing
successive presses of @code{TAB} to cycling through additional character
completion candidates.

@example
MARY
(angry)
I'm hungry.

JOHN|
@end example

@node Do What I Mean
@unnumbered Do What I Mean

Like many scriptwriting programs, in Fountain Mode pressing @code{TAB}
will do the thing you mean depending on context.

This all might seem complicated, but the idea is by covering all the
cases you don't have to think about it.

@defun fountain-dwim
This command, bound to @code{TAB} by default, will perform different
actions based on context.
@end defun

@enumerate
@item
If prefixed with ARG, call @code{fountain-outline-cycle} and pass ARG@.
@item
If point is inside an empty parenthetical, delete it.
@item
If point is inside a non-empty parenthetical, move to a newline.
@item
If point is at a blank line within dialogue, insert a parenthetical.
@item
If point is at a note, cycle visibility of that note.
@item
If point is at the end of line, call @code{completion-at-point}.
@item
If point is a scene heading or section heading, cycle visibility of that heading.
@end enumerate

@node Scene Numbering
@unnumbered Scene Numbering

@tbc

@node Pagination
@unnumbered Pagination

@tbc

@node Exporting
@unnumbered Exporting

Exporting a script in Fountain Mode is handled by one or more external
command-line tools. By defining an ``export profile'', you're able to
easily interface with an external tool from within Emacs.

Essentiall an export profile is just a shell command, interpolated with
a selection of values.

@itemize
@item
@code{%b} is the @code{buffer-file-name}
@item
@code{%B} is the @code{buffer-file-name} sans extension
@item
@code{%n} is the @code{user-full-name}
@item
@code{%t} is the title (from Script @ref{Metadata})
@item
@code{%a} is the author (from Script @ref{Metadata})
@item
@code{%F} is the current date in ISO format
@item
@code{%x} is the current date in your locale's ``preferred'' format
@end itemize

@defun fountain-export-command
This command, bound to @code{C-c C-e} by default, will prompt for an
export profile.
@end defun

@itemize
@item
@uref{https://github.com/ifrost/afterwriting-labs, Afterwriting}
(JavaScript)
@item
@uref{https://github.com/Wraparound/wrap, Wrap} (Go)
@item
@uref{https://github.com/vilcans/screenplain, Screenplain} (Python 3)
@item
@uref{https://github.com/olivertaylor/Textplay, Textplay} (Ruby)
@footnote{Requires @uref{https://www.princexml.com, PrinceXML} for PDF
export.}
@end itemize

@node Indexes
@unnumbered Indexes

@menu
* Index of Commands::
* Index of Variables::
@end menu

@node Index of Commands
@unnumberedsec Index of Commands

@printindex cp

@node Index of Variables
@unnumberedsec Index of Variables

@printindex vr

@bye
